Title: Cleaning, Disinfecting, and Sanitizing

Summary:
Where are germs found?
Germs are a part of everyday life. Some of them are helpful, but others are harmful and cause disease. They can be found everywhere - in our air, soil, and water. They are on our skin and in our bodies. Germs are also on the surfaces and objects that we touch.
Sometimes those germs can spread to you and make you sick. For example, there could be germs on a tv remote. You could get infected with the germs if you touch the remote and then rub your eyes or nose or eat with your hands.
How can I avoid getting germs from surfaces and objects?
To avoid becoming infected by germs from surfaces and objects, it is important to
wash your hands often
. But you can't wash your hands every time you touch something. So it's also important to regularly clean and disinfect surfaces and objects.
What is the difference between cleaning, sanitizing, and disinfecting?
Some people think that disinfecting is same thing as cleaning or sanitizing. But they are actually different:
Cleaning
removes dirt, dust, crumbs, and germs from surfaces or objects. When you clean, you will likely use soap (or detergent) and water to physically clean off the surfaces and objects. This may not necessarily kill the germs. But since you removed some of them, there are fewer germs that could spread infection to you.
Disinfecting
uses chemicals (disinfectants) to kill germs on surfaces and objects. Some common disinfectants are bleach and alcohol solutions. You usually need to leave the disinfectant on the surfaces and objects for a certain period of time to kill the germs. Disinfecting does not necessarily clean dirty surfaces or remove germs.
Sanitizing
could be done by either cleaning, disinfecting, or both. Sanitizing means that you are lowering the number of germs to a safe level. What is considered a safe level depends on public health standards or requirements at a workplace, school, etc. For example, there are sanitizing procedures for restaurants and other facilities that prepare food. What you do to sanitize will vary, depending on your needs. You might be mopping a floor using a mop, a chemical, and water. You might use a dishwasher to sanitize the dishes. Or you could be using an antibacterial wipe on a tv remote.
If you both clean and disinfect a surface or object, you can further lower the risk of spreading infection. There are products that clean and disinfect at the same time.
Which surfaces and objects do I need to clean and disinfect?
To prevent the spread of infection, you should regularly clean and disinfect surfaces and objects that are touched often. For example, in your house, this would include countertops, doorknobs, faucet and toilet handles, light switches, remotes, and toys.
How can I safely clean and disinfect?
It's important to be safe when using cleaning and disinfecting products:
Store them in the containers they came in. Always follow the instructions and pay attention to the warnings on the label.
Do not mix cleaners and disinfectants unless the labels say that it is safe to do so. Combining certain products (such as chlorine bleach and ammonia cleaners) can cause serious injury or even death.
Check the label to see whether you need to use gloves to protect your hands and/or eye protection when using the products
If you swallow, inhale, or get them on your skin
, follow the directions on the label or get medical help
Store them out of the reach of children

Groups:
- Infections
- Safety Issues

MeSH Headings:
- Disinfection

Related Resources:

Resource: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Category: Find an Expert
Organization: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
URL: https://www.cdc.gov/

Resource: Cleaners, Sanitizers, and Disinfectants
Category: Start Here
Organization: American Academy of Pediatrics
URL: https://www.healthychildren.org/English/health-issues/conditions/prevention/Pages/Cleaners-Sanitizers-Disinfectants.aspx

Resource: Cleaning supplies and equipment
Category: Patient Handouts, Encyclopedia
Organization: Medical Encyclopedia
URL: https://medlineplus.gov/ency/patientinstructions/000443.htm

Resource: Cleaning to prevent the spread of germs
Category: Patient Handouts, Encyclopedia
Organization: Medical Encyclopedia
URL: https://medlineplus.gov/ency/patientinstructions/000454.htm

Resource: Environmental Protection Agency
Category: Find an Expert
Organization: Environmental Protection Agency
URL: https://www.epa.gov/

Resource: How to Safely Clean and Sanitize with Bleach
Category: Specifics
Organization: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
URL: https://www.cdc.gov/natural-disasters/safety/how-to-safely-clean-and-sanitize-with-bleach.html

Resource: How to Sanitize Your Phone and Other Devices
Category: Related Issues
Organization: Federal Communications Commission
URL: https://www.fcc.gov/consumers/guides/how-sanitize-your-phone-and-other-devices

Resource: National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases
Category: Find an Expert
Organization: National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases
URL: https://www.niaid.nih.gov/

Resource: What's the Difference between Products that Disinfect, Sanitize, and Clean Surfaces?
Category: Start Here
Organization: Environmental Protection Agency
URL: https://www.epa.gov/coronavirus-and-disinfectants/whats-difference-between-products-disinfect-sanitize-and-clean

Resource: When and How to Clean and Disinfect Your Home
Category: Start Here
Organization: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
URL: https://www.cdc.gov/hygiene/about/when-and-how-to-clean-and-disinfect-your-home.html